 microfabrication techniques have roots in the sta
ndard fabrication methods developed for the semico
nductor industry [8. 1?3] . some of these techniqu
es are common between the micro/nano and very larg
e-scale integration ( VLSI ) microchip fabrication
 disciplines . lithography is the technique used t
o transfer a computer-generated pattern onto a sub
strate (silicon, glass, GaAs, etc.) this pattern i
s then used to etch an underlying thin film (oxide
, nitride, etc

silicon s ubstrate spin photoresist Soft bake Alig
n the mask Expose the wafer Develop the resist Har
d bake End of litho graphy Fig. 8.1 Lithography pr
ocess flow Part A 8.1Basic Microfabrication Techni
ques 233 1. Contact 2. Proximity 3. Projection Alt
hough contact printing gives better resolution com
- pared with the proximity technique, the constant
 contact of the mask with the photoreasist reduces
 the process yield and can damage the

silicon oxidation is a process used to obtain a th
in film of SiO 2 with excellent quality (very low 
density of defects) and thickness homogeneity . a 
layer of about 20  (native oxide) is enough to pas
sivate the surface and prevent further oxydation .
 the process is typically carried out at temperatu
res in the range of 900?1200C in the pres- ence of
 O 2(dry oxyation) or H 2O + carrier gas .

the introduction of certain impurities in a semico
n- ductor can change its electrical, chemical, and
 even mechanical properties . in micro-/nanofabric
ation technologies doping has additional applicati
ons such as the forma-tion of piezoresistors for m
echanical transducers or the creation of etch stop
-layers . ion implantation allows more precise con
trol of the dose and the impurity profile (the con
centration versus depth) .

the most common CVD processes in mi- crofabricatio
n are low-pressure CVD ( LPCVD )a n d plasma-enhan
ced ( PECVD) large numbers of wafers can be proces
sed simultaneously and the ma- terial is deposited
 on both sides . the process temperature depends o
n the material to be de- posited, but generally is
 in the range 550?900C . as in oxidation, high tem
peratures and contamination is- sues

silicon-on-sapphire substrates and some het- erost
ructures are fabricated in this way . most common 
in microfabrication is the growth of silicon on an
other silicon substrate . the most common for sili
con is thermal chemical vapor deposition or vapor-
phase epitaxy ( VPE ). the latter typically uses m
olecular beams from thermally evap-orated elementa
l sources aiming at the substrate in an ultrahigh-
vacuum chamber .

inert ions bombarding the target are produced in d
irect-current (DC)o r RF plasma . evaporation and 
sputtering systems are often able to deposit more 
than one material simultane- ously or sequentially
 . tension in evaporated or sputtered layers is ty
pically tensile . thickness beyond 2 m is rarely d
eposited with these processes . electrodeposition 
is a process typi- cally used to obtain thick meta
l structures .

Pulsed laser and atomic layer deposition have attr
acted a considerable amount of attention re- centl
y . these two techniques offer several unique adva
ntages compared with other thin-film deposition . 
a typical PLD deposition setup method that is part
icularly useful for next-generation nanoscale devi
ce fabrication . the main advantages of the PLD ar
e its simplicity and ability to deposit complex ma
terials with preserved stoichiometry . other depos
ited materials include transition metals (Cu, Co, 
Fe, and Ni), metal oxide

wet etching and silicon nitride are the most commo
n masking ma- terials for the wet oxide etch . sil
icon dioxide is commonly etched in dilute (140?200
C) phosphoric acid with sili- con oxide as the mas
king material . etch rate of 1000  /min in HF ( BH
F :H F+NH 4F) is not very common in micro/nanofabr
ication .

Isotropic etching of silicon using HF/HNO 3/CH3COO
H dates back to the 1950s . the etch mechanism for
 this combination has been elucidated and is as fo
llows: HNO 3is used to oxidize the sili- con, whic
h is then dissolved away in the HF . for short etc
h times, silicon dioxide can be used as the maskin
g material; however, one needs to use sili nitride
 if a longer etch time is

silicon wafer under etch consists of an n-epi regi
on on a p-type substrate . a reverse-biased p?n ju
nction (electrochem- ical etch stop) is formed and
 etching is stopped . one must take into account t
he finite etch rate of the masking materials . the
 three basic dry etch techniques are plasma based 
. they have several advantages when compared with 
wet etchants .

ion milling is a purely physical process which use
s accelerated inert ions (e.g., Ar+) striking per-
 pendicular to the surface to remove the material 
(p104?103Torr) the main charac- teristics of this 
technique are very low etch rates (in the order of
 a few nm /min) and poor selectivity (close to 1:1
 for most materials); hence it is generally used t
o etch very thin

silicon-silicon bonding is one of the most importa
nt fab-rication techniques in microsystem technolo
gy . silicon?silicon fusion (or silicon direct bon
ding) and silicon?glass electrostatic (or anodic) 
bonding are used in micromechanical devices and si
licon-on-insulator (SOI) substrates . the bonding 
procedure is as follows: the silicon or oxide-coat
ed silicon wafers are first thoroughly cleaned (ac
tivated) in HF .

silicon fusion bonding is another major substrate 
joining technique . a high-temperature (800?1200C)
 anneal is usually re- quired . the bond can be ob
served visu- ally as a dark-grayish front which ex
pands across the wafer . silicon?silicon anodic bo
nding using sputtered or evaporated glass interlay
er is also possible . in eutectic bonding process,
 gold-coated silicon wafers are bonded

eutectic bonding can be accomplished at low temper
atures but achieving uniformity over large areas h
as proven to be challenging . glass frit can also 
be used as an interlayer in sub- strate bonding . 
a thin layer of glass is deposited and preglazed a
nd the sandwich is heated to above the glass melti
ng temperature . the dimensional spectrum of the m
icrostructures that can be fabricated using these 
tech-niques spans from 1 mm to 1 m .

a robot based station can take over precise proces
sing and assembly tasks . a microassembly station 
must be able to automatically accomplish the follo
wing steps with its microrobots . this step can al
so be automated in a versatile microa . station . 
the topic "flexible micromanipulation systems" has
 become of interest, especially for microsystem pr
oduction . it is a topic of interest for . microsy
stems, especially in biomedical research and eye a
nd plastic surgery .

the availability of highly precise assembly proces
ses will make it easier to realize operable micros
ystems . micromanipulation is a common practice in
 medicine and biological research . many microrobo
ts can be active at the same time in a multifuncti
onal manipulation desktop station . the use of sev
eral flexible robots allows the operator to perfor
m manipulations in different work areas . if the a
ssem bly tasks are more complex, the robot's comma
nds are passed along to an input unit .

nanorobot systems carry out the manipulation tasks
 in close cooperation . the robot size is comparab
le to that of the manipulated object . in general 
manipulations vary from an application to another,
 the following 4 operational sequences are always 
taking place: grip, transport, position, release, 
adjust, fix in place and processing steps like cut
ting, soldering, gluing, removal of impurities, et
c. the realization of this concept, which is based
 on human behavior, is in the di stant future.

